# GopherCon EU2025: hot takes

Here is to GopherConEU 2025, held this week in Berlin (June 16th to 18th), and to take this occasion to share with you my take on it and the highlights that were featured in this edition.

__TL;DR__: I was impressed by the talk selection for this edition: a lot of the talks had valuable and actionable takeaways; a big plus was the number of occasions to network throughout the conference.

## Highlights

To share my experience and my idea of what stood out during the GopherConEU this year, I'm going to focus on some specific topics:

- _Features_
- _Reflections_
- _Community_

### Features

The Go features highlighted in this edition were the following:

- Mike maps: maps with swiss table implementation (API no change, implementation change) -> optimization

From Go v1.25 maps will change implementation to use swiss tables to improve performances with the insertion/update and lookup operations. The main goal of swiss tables is to change the way collisions are resolved by improving on the open addressing algorithm. 7 bits for the control table. Parallel comparison for all of the values in the control table at the same time is the key on the improved performance.

- Mike proto: opaque API for protobuf (API change) -> improvements

Also there will be an improvement on robustness and performance for the protobuf protocol for exchanging data with the introduction of the opaque API which relies on lazy initialization to say whether a field is set or not (compared to protobuf version 3 which could not easily distinguish between unset field and its zero value)

- Damien: async Testing (mix Reflections + features as for the testing/sync)

Another improvement coming will be the testing/sync package to help test asynchronous functions. Today the problem can be traced to the usage of time package (with tests becoming flaky and/or slow) and trying to adapt code to make it testable but losing idiomaticness and simplicity. With testing/sync we can use time bubbles to have time in tests working like in the go playground and add utilities to handle syncronization of goroutines in tests

- Panel: some packages are getting a V2 but this effort is being done with conscience (risk of double maintenance, also mentioned in API talk)

### Reflections

- Dave Cheney: names, instantiation, helpers. Being consistent is more improtant than naming <see notes>

- Johnathan Amsterdam: how to extend an API safely

This talk was more about how to make API extensible and future proof, so they can evolve easily <see notes>

- Brittany: Refactor not rewrite <see notes>

- Massimo: Goroutines: AsyncRoutineManager, redhat, async-routine

This talk highlited the fact that the execution stack of goroutines is not human-readable enough to make sense of it easily. Which makes debugging what happens in goroutines hard. Folks from redhat have come around to create a library that provides means to give human-readability to goroutine execution and add some extensions to be able to monitor and log around it

### Community

- Ayke: TinyGo concurrency
- Last talk: How to contribute to Go, my opinion it takes a lot of time, effort and commitment. But once you get there, there is a positive feeling of having been able to contribute to something that we care about which gives both satisfaction and a sense of responsibility.

## Bonus track

I got to try TinyGo for the first time at the TinyGo Hacking session. It was fun!
